DOCS-#3863: Add usage guide to documentation (#3864)
modin-project/modin: docs/usage_guide/optimization_guide/index.rst

Optimization Guide
==================

Here you can find information on Modin optimizations both for general query pipeline and for specific operations.

Understanding of Modin's partitioning mechanism
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Partitioning scheme is very important for performance, that's why we recommend you to get acknowledge Modin's
underlying partitioning mechanism and how to tune it, in order to be able to achieve better performance.

How does Modin partition a frame
--------------------------------

Modin uses partitioning schema that partitions a frame along both axis, resulting into a matrix
of even partitions. The row and column chunk sizes are computed independently based
on the length of the appropriate axis and special Modin's :doc:`configuration variables </flow/modin/config>`
(``NPartitions`` and ``MinPartitionSize``):

> - `NPartitions` is the maximum amount of splits along an axis, by default it equals the number of cores on the machine.

Reviewer: An example of setting these variables is shown below in the "How to tune partitioning" section

- `MinPartitionSize` is the minimum amount of rows/columns to do a split. Literally speaking, if the `MinPartitionSize`
  is 32, there won't be any split along the column axis unless the amount of columns is greater than 32. Once it's greater
  (for example 34) then the column axis is sliced into two partitions: containing 32 and 2 columns accordingly.

Beware that the ``NPartitions`` is a limit for the number of partitions `along a single axis`, which means, that
the actual limit for the frame itself is the square of ``NPartitions``.

.. figure:: /img/partitioning_mechanism/partitioning_examples.svg
   :align: center

Full-axis functions
-------------------

> Some of the aggregation functions require knowledge about the whole axis, for example at ``.apply(foo, axis=0)``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some of the aggregation functions require knowledge about the entire axis, for example for ``.apply(foo, axis=0)``
```

the passed function ``foo`` expects to receive data for the whole column at once.

> When a full-axis function is applied, the partitions along this axis are being collected to a single worker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a full-axis function is applied, the partitions along this axis are collected at a single worker
```

that processes the function. After the function is done, the data is split again across all of the workers.

.. figure:: /img/partitioning_mechanism/full_axis_function.svg
   :align: center

Note that the amount of remote calls is equal to the number of partitions, which means that since the number

> of partitions is decreased for full-axis functions it also decreases its parallelism potential.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of partitions is decreased for full-axis functions it also decreases the potential for parallelism.
```

Also note, that the reduction functions such as ``.sum()``, ``.mean()``, ``.max()``, etc are not considered
to be full-axis and so not suffering from the decreasing of parallelism.

How to tune partitioning
------------------------

> As you can see from the examples above, the more the frame's shape is closer to a square, the closer the number of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see from the examples above, the more the dataframe's shape is closer to a square, the closer the number of
```

partitions to the square of `NPartitions`. In the case of `NPartitions` equals to the number of workers,
that means that a single worker is going to process multiple partitions at once, which slows down overall performance.

If your workflow mainly operates with wide frames and non-full-axis functions, it makes sense to reduce the

> amount of `NPartitions` so a single worker would process a single partition.

Reviewer: rephrased into 
"
If your workflow mainly operates with wide dataframes and non-full-axis functions, it makes sense to <i>reduce the
``NPartitions`` value</i> so a single worker would process a single partition.
"

.. figure:: /img/partitioning_mechanism/repartition_square_frames.svg
   :align: center

Copy-pastable example, showing how tuning ``NPartition`` value for wide frames may improve performance on your machine:

.. code-block:: python

  from multiprocessing import cpu_count
  import modin.config as cfg
  import modin.pandas as pd
  import numpy as np
  import timeit

  # Generating data for a square-like frame
  data = np.random.randint(0, 100, size=(2**10, 2**10))

  # Explicitly setting `NPartitions` to its default value
  cfg.NPartitions.put(cpu_count())

  # Each worker process `sqrt(cpu_count())` amount of partitions
  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  print(f"10 times of .abs(): {timeit.timeit(lambda: df.abs(), number=10)}s.")
  # Possible output: 2.59s.

  # Taking a square root of the the current `NPartitions` to make more even partitioning
  cfg.NPartitions.put(int(cpu_count() ** 0.5))

  # Each worker process a single partition
  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  print(f"10 times of .abs(): {timeit.timeit(lambda: df.abs(), number=10)}s.")
  # Possible output: 0.24s.

> Do not iterate over Modin DataFrame

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Avoid iterating over Modin DataFrame
```

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Use ``df.apply()`` or other aggregation methods when possible instead of iterating over a frame.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use ``df.apply()`` or other aggregation methods when possible instead of iterating over a dataframe.
```

> For-loops don't scale and force to collect all the distributed data to the driver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For-loops don't scale and forces the distributed data to be collected back at the driver.
```

  result = []
  t1 = timer()
  # Iterating over a frame forces to collect distributed data to the driver and doesn't scale
  for idx, row in md_df.iterrows():
      result.append((row[1] + row[2]) / row[3])
  print(f"Filling a list by iterating a Modin frame: {timer() - t1:.2f}s.")
  # Possible output: 36.15s.

  t1 = timer()
  # Using `.apply()` perfectly scales to all axis-partitions
  result = md_df.apply(lambda row: (row[1] + row[2]) / row[3], axis=1).to_numpy().tolist()
  print(f"Filling a list by using '.apply()' and converting the result to a list: {timer() - t1:.2f}s.")
  # Possible output: 0.22s.

Use Modin's algebra API to implement custom parallel functions
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Modin provides a set of low-level parallel-implemented operators which can be used to build most of the
aggregation functions. These operators are present in the :doc:`algebra module </flow/modin/core/dataframe/algebra>`.
Modin DataFrame allows for users to use their own aggregations built with this module. Visit the 
:doc:`appropriate section </flow/modin/core/dataframe/algebra>` of the documentation for the steps to do it.

> Do not mix pandas and Modin DataFrames

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Avoid mixing pandas and Modin DataFrames
```

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Although Modin is considered to be a drop-in replacement for pandas, they are not intended to be used together

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although Modin is considered to be a drop-in replacement for pandas, Modin and pandas are not intended to be used together
```

> in a single flow. Passing a pandas DataFrame as an argument for a Modin's frame method may either slowdown

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason we're repeatedly referring to a dataframe as a frame? (I changed a few instances earlier.)

Reviewer: replaced "frame" -> "dataframe"

the function (because it has to process non-distributed object) or raise an error. You would also get an undefined

> behaviour if pass a Modin frame to pandas methods, pandas identifies Modin's objects as a simple iterable,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
behavior if you pass a Modin frame as an input to pandas methods, since pandas identifies Modin's objects as a simple iterable,
```

> and so can't use its potential.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and so can't leverage its benefits as a distributed dataframe.
```

  pd_df, pd_df_copy = pandas.DataFrame(data), pandas.DataFrame(data)

  print("concat modin frame + pandas frame:")
  # Concatenating modin frame + pandas frame using modin '.concat()'
  # This case is bad because Modin have to process non-distributed pandas object
  time = timeit.timeit(lambda: pd.concat([md_df, pd_df]), number=10)
  print(f"\t{time}s.\n")
  # Possible output: 0.44s.

  print("concat modin frame + modin frame:")
  # Concatenating modin frame + modin frame using modin '.concat()'
  # This is an ideal case, Modin is being used as intended
  time = timeit.timeit(lambda: pd.concat([md_df, md_df_copy]), number=10)
  print(f"\t{time}s.\n")
  # Possible output: 0.05s.

  print("concat pandas frame + pandas frame:")
  # Concatenating pandas frame + pandas frame using pandas '.concat()'
  time = timeit.timeit(lambda: pandas.concat([pd_df, pd_df_copy]), number=10)
  print(f"\t{time}s.\n")
  # Possible output: 0.31s.

  print("concat pandas frame + modin frame:")
  # Concatenating pandas frame + modin frame using pandas '.concat()'
  time = timeit.timeit(lambda: pandas.concat([pd_df, md_df]), number=10)
  print(f"\t{time}s.\n")
  # Possible output: TypeError

> Operation-specific settings

Reviewer 3: Wondering if the optimization guide should be split into general optimization guidelines and a separate page for operator-specific optimizations.

Reviewer: I don't see a problem with putting them on a single page since a user can easily jump through the topics with the right bar. The navigation page with only two links (general opt guide + operation specific) would look empty IMO. We can split the guide into different pages if we end up having much more than only 2 sections.

Reviewer 3: Ok that makes sense. We can keep as a single page.

Optimization Guide
==================

Here you can find more information about Modin's optimizations both for a pipeline of operations as well as for specific operations.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Understanding Modin's partitioning mechanism
> """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
> Modin's partitioning is crucial for performance; so we recommend expert users to understand Modin's

Author: ```suggestion
Understanding Modin's partitioning mechanism
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Modin's partitioning is crucial for performance; so we recommend expert users to understand Modin's
```

partitioning mechanism and how to tune it, to achieve better performance.

How does Modin partition a dataframe
------------------------------------

Modin uses a partitioning scheme that partitions a dataframe along both axes, resulting in a matrix
of partitions. The row and column chunk sizes are computed independently based
on the length of the appropriate axis and Modin's special :doc:`configuration variables </flow/modin/config>`
(``NPartitions`` and ``MinPartitionSize``):

> - `NPartitions` is the maximum number of splits along an axis; by default, it equals the number of cores on the machine.

Author: ```suggestion
- ``NPartitions`` is the maximum number of splits along an axis; by default, it equals to the number of cores on your local machine or cluster of nodes.
```

> - `MinPartitionSize` is the minimum number of rows/columns to do a split. For instance, if `MinPartitionSize`

Author: ```suggestion
- ``MinPartitionSize`` is the minimum number of rows/columns to do a split. For instance, if ``MinPartitionSize``
```

  is 32, the column axis will not be split unless the amount of columns is greater than 32. If it is is greater, for example, 34, 

>   then the column axis is sliced into two partitions: containing 32 and 2 columns accordingly.

Reviewer 4: Possible, need to add small mentioning about a case when data shape is couldn't be split to `NPartitions` splits because of `MinPartitionSize` restrictions. For example, what will happen in case shape is (70, 70) and `NParttions` is 112.

Author: Shown in the picture below.

Beware that ``NPartitions`` specifies a limit for the number of partitions `along a single axis`, which means, that
the actual limit for the entire dataframe itself is the square of ``NPartitions``.

.. figure:: /img/partitioning_mechanism/partitioning_examples.svg
   :align: center

Full-axis functions
-------------------

Some of the aggregation functions require knowledge about the entire axis, for example at ``.apply(foo, axis=0)``
the passed function ``foo`` expects to receive data for the whole column at once.

When a full-axis function is applied, the partitions along this axis are collected at a single worker

> that processes the function. After the function is done, the data is split again across all of the workers.

Author: ```suggestion
that processes the function. After the function is done, partitioning the data is back to normal.
```

.. figure:: /img/partitioning_mechanism/full_axis_function.svg
   :align: center

Note that the amount of remote calls is equal to the number of partitions, which means that since the number
of partitions is decreased for full-axis functions it also decreases the potential for parallelism.

> Also note, that reduce functions such as ``.sum()``, ``.mean()``, ``.max()``, etc are not considered

Author: ```suggestion
Also note, that reduce functions such as ``.sum()``, ``.mean()``, ``.max()``, etc. are not considered
```

to be full-axis, so they do not suffer from the decreasing level of parallelism.

How to tune partitioning
------------------------

As you can see from the examples above, the more the dataframe's shape is closer to a square, the closer the number of
partitions to the square of ``NPartitions``. In the case of ``NPartitions`` equals to the number of workers,
that means that a single worker is going to process multiple partitions at once, which slows down overall performance.

If your workflow mainly operates with wide dataframes and non-full-axis functions, it makes sense to reduce the
``NPartitions`` value so a single worker would process a single partition.

.. figure:: /img/partitioning_mechanism/repartition_square_frames.svg
   :align: center

> Copy-pastable example, showing how tuning ``NPartition`` value for wide frames may improve performance on your machine:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Copy-pastable example, showing how tuning ``NPartitions`` value for wide frames may improve performance on your machine:
```

.. code-block:: python

  from multiprocessing import cpu_count
  import modin.config as cfg
  import modin.pandas as pd
  import numpy as np
  import timeit

  # Generating data for a square-like dataframe
  data = np.random.randint(0, 100, size=(2**10, 2**10))

  # Explicitly setting `NPartitions` to its default value
  cfg.NPartitions.put(cpu_count())

>   # Each worker process `sqrt(cpu_count())` amount of partitions

Reviewer 4: Why is `sqrt(cpu_count())` be an amount of partitions in the each worker? Shouldn't this be equal to `cpu_count()` here?

>   # Each worker process `sqrt(cpu_count())` amount of partitions

Author: ```suggestion
  # Each worker processes `sqrt(cpu_count())` amount of partitions
```

  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  print(f"10 times of .abs(): {timeit.timeit(lambda: df.abs(), number=10)}s.")
  print(f"NPartitions: {cfg.NPartitions.get()}")
  # Possible output:
  #     10 times of .abs(): 2.59s.

>   #     NPartitions: 112

Reviewer 4: As I see, number of cores on you machine is 112. Data shape is (1024, 1024). For each axis we have 32 splits only. I think, more representable difference will be occurred when data shape will be increased to include 112 splits along both axis.
This will demonstrate case of `n_cores**2` total number of partitions.

>   # Taking a square root of the the current `NPartitions` to make more even partitioning
>   cfg.NPartitions.put(int(cpu_count() ** 0.5))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  # Taking a square root of the the current `cpu_count` to make more even partitioning
  cfg.NPartitions.put(int(cpu_count() ** 0.5))
```

This will be more clear and aligned with the picture above.

>   # Each worker process a single partition

Author: ```suggestion
  # Each worker processes a single partition
```

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Use ``df.apply()`` or other aggregation methods when possible instead of iterating over a dataframe.
For-loops don't scale and forces the distributed data to be collected back at the driver.

Copy-pastable example, showing how replacing a for-loop to the equivalent ``.apply()`` may improve performance:

.. code-block:: python

  import modin.pandas as pd
  import numpy as np
  from timeit import default_timer as timer

  data = np.random.randint(1, 100, (2 ** 10, 2 ** 2))

  md_df = pd.DataFrame(data)

  result = []
  t1 = timer()
  # Iterating over a dataframe forces to collect distributed data to the driver and doesn't scale
  for idx, row in md_df.iterrows():
      result.append((row[1] + row[2]) / row[3])
  print(f"Filling a list by iterating a Modin frame: {timer() - t1:.2f}s.")
  # Possible output: 36.15s.

  t1 = timer()
  # Using `.apply()` perfectly scales to all axis-partitions
  result = md_df.apply(lambda row: (row[1] + row[2]) / row[3], axis=1).to_numpy().tolist()
  print(f"Filling a list by using '.apply()' and converting the result to a list: {timer() - t1:.2f}s.")
  # Possible output: 0.22s.

> Use Modin's algebra API to implement custom parallel functions
> """"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Author: ```suggestion
Use Modin's Dataframe Algebra API to implement custom parallel functions
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

Modin provides a set of low-level parallel-implemented operators which can be used to build most of the
aggregation functions. These operators are present in the :doc:`algebra module </flow/modin/core/dataframe/algebra>`.

> Modin DataFrame allows for users to use their own aggregations built with this module. Visit the 

Author: ```suggestion
Modin DataFrame allows users to use their own aggregations built with this module. Visit the 
```

Optimization Guide
==================

> Here you can find more information about Modin's optimizations both for a pipeline of operations as well as for specific operations.

Reviewer 5: I would like to add a comment here at the beginning about how Modin will do most of the optimization for you.
```suggestion
Modin has chosen default values for a lot of the configurations here that provide excellent performance in most 
cases. This page is for those who love to optimize their code and those who are curious about existing optimizations
within Modin. Here you can find more information about Modin's optimizations both for a pipeline of operations as 
well as for specific operations.
```

> Optimization Guide

Reviewer 6: I would change this name to an advanced optimization guide, and maybe provide a link to the `modin/core/dataframe/pandas/dataframe/dataframe.py` file where the algebra is located with a quick high-level description in case a less advanced user looks at this.

Author: Not sure this requires renaming and putting the link.

Author: It would likely be better to rename this name to `Best Practices`.

Reviewer: I tend to leave the title as it is, this page is more about a guide, rather than just listing best practices for Modin, since we're giving a brief about partitioning and all the related stuff.

Reviewer 5: I tend to agree with @naren-ponder on this one, since it is more for advanced users. I do not feel strongly either way.

Author: What is the difference between an advanced optimization guide and just an optimization guide? We are going to provide both intuitive tips and tricky ones. I think everything of those should lay on just opmization_guide page.

Author: Replaced to optimization notes. Also, I think it should be divided into separate sections: pandas_on_ray/dask, omnisci_on_native.

==================

Here you can find information on Modin optimizations both for general query pipeline and for specific operations.

Generic settings
""""""""""""""""

If you are working with a wide DataFrame and performing an operation that requires ``map`` Core Dataframe Algebra operator
to be applied cell-wise, you may want to change the number of partitions DataFrame should partition into to avoid

> excessive amount of remote partitions, which is much greater than the number of CPUs.

Reviewer: It's not clear why a user may observe "an excessive amount of remote partitions". Do we have a section in docs, describing the partitioning strategy and that it may result in NCORES^2 amount partitions? If so, I'd like to link it here. If there's no such section, I would briefly describe the partitioning mechanism itself here, on this page.

> to be applied cell-wise, you may want to change the number of partitions DataFrame should partition into to avoid
> excessive amount of remote partitions, which is much greater than the number of CPUs.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
to be applied cell-wise, you may want to change the number of DataFrame partitions to avoid
an excessive amount of remote partitions, which is much greater than the number of CPUs.
```

.. code-block:: python

  from multiprocessing import cpu_count
  import modin.config as cfg
  import modin.pandas as pd
  import numpy as np

  data = np.random.randint(0, 100, size=(2**15, 2**15))

>   cfg.NPartitions.put(cpu_count())

Reviewer 6: It might be useful to add an inline comment here with an actual `cpu_count()` number.

Reviewer: added the `NPartitions` [variable printing](https://github.com/YarShev/modin/blame/dev/yigoshev-issue3863/docs/usage_guide/optimization_guide/index.rst#L81-L84) in the example

  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  %timeit df.abs()
  1.9 s  49.8 ms per loop (mean  std. dev. of 7 runs, 1 loop each)

>   cfg.NPartitions.put(int(cpu_count() / 2))

Reviewer: '2' looks like a magic constant here, that speedups computations in Modin. The reason for this is that there's no explaining full description of the partitioning mechanism, and how the amount of remote calls correlates with the number of cores and `NPartitions` variable. I'd like to see it here.

  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  %timeit df.abs()
  506 ms  17.5 ms per loop (mean  std. dev. of 7 runs, 1 loop each)

Operation-specific settings
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""

merge
-----

> ``merge`` operation in Modin uses broadcast join algorithm: combining a right Modin DataFrame into pandas DataFrame and
> broadcasting it to row partitions of the left Modin DataFrame. In order to minimize interprocess communication cost when doing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
``merge`` operation in Modin uses the broadcast join algorithm: combining a right Modin DataFrame into a pandas DataFrame and
broadcasting it to the row partitions of the left Modin DataFrame. In order to minimize interprocess communication cost when doing
```

> inner join you may want to swap left and right DataFrames.

Reviewer: It's actually strange, that the user should worry about this, I think we have to treat it as an issue and fix it on the Modin side.

> inner join you may want to swap left and right DataFrames.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
an inner join you may want to swap left and right DataFrames.
```
